---
layout: post
title:      "Why I'm Here"
date:       2020-04-13 12:34:59 -0400
permalink:  why_im_here
---


My main goal in pursuing this course is to be able to do something important and meaningful with the skills I learn. Currently I work at Starbucks, and while there's plenty that I enjoy about the work, I don't feel like what I do matters, or that there would be any difference if (or realistically, when) the work is replaced by automation. I want to do something that helps people.

I've chosen software engineering because I have a little experience with programming already, and really enjoyed the problem solving involved in it. I started out in college as an Environmental Engineering major, but quickly switched to Computer Science after I took my first coding class because it was that interesting. I later transferred schools and switched majors again to Game Design. I originally intended to pursue the programming part of Game Design, but after discovering how much fun 3D modeling and animation were, I switched to Art. Now I'm back to pick up where I left off and have another skill that I can make a career out of!

I think it's common for millenials to be expected to constantly pursue a "dream job" where they're making great money doing what they love, keeping a healthy work-life balance, and are single-handedly saving the world. I think that's a pretty high bar to set, and it usually doesn't play out like that. Sometimes working in the field you're passionate about can kill your passion faster than anything else. When you make art in your free time, you are beholden to no patron but your own imagination. When you turn it into an occupation, it's possible that the freedom and joy of the work is no longer there. Thus, my long-term goal isn't necessarily an all-encompassing dream *job*, but a life that's balanced around all my needs. My occupation doesn't need to be the single thing fulfilling me, it might just be at the perfect intersection of pay, engagement, meaning, and time-consumption to keep the other pieces of my life running smoothly.

Since starting here, I've already reconnected to the joy of learning new things, and I'm going to challenge myself to keep practicing my sculpting and animation skills that I've been neglecting. If I push past the fear of sharing my art, I can not only share something cool with my cohort, but also use it as more motivation to keep getting better. Having a community of people who are exctied and dedicated to learn is something I didn't realize I missed so much about college. It really keeps you engaged with the material because you can get help from peers, and answer questions together that you wouldn't have thought to ask yourself. It also keeps you accountable to yourself. I can decide each day how many lessons to do, and knowing that other students are pushing ahead motivates me to keep up. Even if I'm past the recommended progress, I want to push further, just to keep up with other students. 

I'm also glad to be learning programming again, because we're quickly reaching a point where having a basic knowledge of these skills is going to be mandatory. The magic of abstraction has given us tools to interact with code without knowing anything about what's going on under the hood. But as we continue advancing, being able to work with these tools and extend them to our particular needs is going to be extremely useful. Not just as a skill for careers, but for our own personal projects.

Long-term, I'd love to do something in the realm of bio-informatics or genetics. I think we're on the verge of defying aging completely, and we may be the first immortal generation. It would be the greatest embarrassment if humanity were to come this close to immortality and go extinct from corporate greed or nationalist wars. I'm sick of pretending that this is the best we can do. We know there are better energy sources than fossil fuels, we know driverless cars are safer and better than human operators, but we refuse to make the switch because we underestimate how well we can adapt to the transition. Most of the projects that are pushing us to retrofit to new tech requires skills in programming, and I'm hoping this course can set me up to take part in such projects. I can't sit around, knowing that these problems can be solved, and not having the skills to do anything about it.
